Create mattermost-omnibus.rst (#3873)
mattermost/docs: source/install/mattermost-omnibus.rst

Installing Mattermost Omnibus
============================

Overview
---------

Mattermost Omnibus is a Debian package that packages the individual components of a Mattermost deployment into a single installation process. The package leverages the ``apt`` package manager to install and keep the components of the platform updated, using a custom CLI and ansible recipes to link those components together and configure them.

Mattermost Omnibus currently supports Ubuntu's ``bionic`` and ``focal`` distributions. Support for RedHat/CentOS distributions will be available in future versions. 

Prerequisites
-------------

> - A clean Ubuntu server (18.04. Or 20.04)

Reviewer: We should still state the domain name as a requirement, as that's the recommended way of installing Omnibus

Reviewer 2: ok, I am good with adding this:
- A domain name pointing to that server

- Root level access to the server

.. note:: 

>   With Mattermost Omnibus, the ``config.json`` file no longer exists. So you’ll need to use mmctl to make changes to your Mattermost server configuration using ``mmctl config edit``. If you wish to manage your server locally, you may want to enable local mode for mmctl.

Reviewer: This is something that we can move to the "Configuring Mattermost Omnibus" section

Author: Done.

>   With Mattermost Omnibus, the ``config.json`` file no longer exists. So you’ll need to use mmctl to make changes to your mattermost server config using the following command: `mmctl config edit`. If you wish to manage your server locally, you may want to enable local mode for mmctl.

Author: ```suggestion
  With Mattermost Omnibus, the ``config.json`` file no longer exists. So you’ll need to use mmctl to make changes to your Mattermost server config using the following command: ``mmctl config edit``. If you wish to manage your server locally, you may want to enable local mode for mmctl.
```

Installing Mattermost Omnibus
------------------------------

> During installation you can provide an existing domain name that points to the Ubuntu server or, if you don't have one available, you can log in using the server's IP address.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
During installation you will be asked to provide a domain name that points to your server or, if you don't have one available, you can just use the server's IP address.
```

Reading further I see that this is stated as well in line 35, so I think we could start directly with the `The Omnibus repositories are configured using a cURL command`

.. note::

>   Plugin uploads and HTTPS are enabled by default. These settings are modified in the ``yaml`` file using mmctl (link to config section).

Author: ```suggestion
  Plugin uploads and HTTPS are enabled by default. These settings are modified in the ``yaml`` file using `mmctl config edit <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/mmctl-cli-tool.html#mmctl-config-edit>`__. 
```

>   Plugin uploads and HTTPS are enabled by default. These settings are modified in the ``yaml`` file using `mmctl config edit <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/mmctl-cli-tool.html#mmctl-config-edit>`__. 

Reviewer: This can be moved to the "Configuring Mattermost Omnibus" section as well

The Omnibus repositories are configured using a cURL command: 

``curl -o- deb.packages.mattermost.com/repo-setup.sh | sudo bash``

> This command installs and configures a ``PostgreSQL`` database, an ``nginx`` web server to act as a proxy, and ``certbot`` to issue and renew the SSL certificate. 

Reviewer: This command configures the repositories needed for those three components rather than installing the components themselves

In order to issue that certificate, the installer requests a domain name and an email address from us. These are used to generate the certificate and deliver any related communications respectively.

Installing Omnibus Package and Mattermost Server

> ------------------------------------------------

Reviewer: I don't think the installation process has two differentiated phases, more two steps, so I'd say that we could include these two sections (Installing Mattermost Omnibus and Installing Omnibus Package and Mattermost Server) under the same headline, maybe just Installing Mattermost Omnibus

If you're installing Omnibus, and have a domain and SSL use: 

``sudo apt install mattermost-omnibus``.

After all the packages are installed, Omnibus runs the ansible scripts that configure all the platform components and starts the server. To access Mattermost, open a browser, navigate to your domain, and create the System Admin user to start using the platform. 

You can also install Mattermost without a domain name or SSL (not recommended). To do this use: 

> ``sudo MMO_HTTPS=false apt install mattermost-omnibus``

Reviewer: This should be explained in the FAQs rather than presented as an option at the same level of the SSL enabled installation

Reviewer 2: I am ok with moving this completely to FAQ section.

Updating Mattermost Omnibus
-----------------------------

> Mattermost Omnibus is integrated with Ubuntu’s OS's package manager. When a new Mattermost version is released, run:

Reviewer: This is correct, but just in case we decide to start supporting other APT based distros, we can reference APT directly, like:

```suggestion
Mattermost Omnibus is integrated with the ``apt`` package manager. When a new Mattermost version is released, run:
```

``sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade``

This downloads the latest version of Mattermost and updates your Mattermost platform. 

> Removing Mattermost Omnibus

Reviewer: Adding here a suggestion for a section that explains the different config properties that the `mmomni.yml` file has, and what are they useful for:

```suggestion
Configuring Mattermost Omnibus
----------------------------------------

Omnibus has its own configuration file located in ``/etc/mattermost/mmomni.yml``. This file contains the data that Omnibus needs to configure the platform and connect all the services together. For Omnibus to work properly, there are some configuration parameters that are fixed and cannot be changed through the web interface (for example, the port that Mattermost uses to run) and some others that need to be configured directly through this file instead of in the Mattermost web interface or the configuration. The properties that you can configure in this file are:

``db_user``: the PostgreSQL database user. This value is generated during the Omnibus installation and should not be changed.
``db_password``: the PostgreSQL database password. This value is generated during the Omnibus installation and should not be changed.
``fqdn``: the domain name for the Mattermost application. This is the value that is asked during the install process, and it’s used to populate the ServiceSettings.SiteURL Mattermost configuration property, as well as to retrieve and configure the SSL certificate for the server.
``email``: the email for certificate communications. This is the value that is asked during the install process, and it will not be used if https is disabled.
``https``: this indicates if the platform should be configured to use https or http. It can have the ``true`` and ``false`` values. The recommended way to install Mattermost is to use https, but you can disable it if required. You can read more about this here [[LINK TO THE FAQ]]
``data_directory``: this is the directory where Mattermost stores its data
``enable_plugin_uploads``: this setting is used to configure the ``PluginSettings.EnableUploads`` Mattermost configuration property. It can have the ``true`` and ``false`` values
``enable_local_mode``: this setting is used to configure the ``ServiceSettings.EnableLocalMode`` Mattermost configuration property. It can have the ``true`` and ``false`` values

Removing Mattermost Omnibus
```

``mmomni backup -o /tmp/Aug27-2020.tgz``

Restore example:

``mmomni restore /tmp/Aug27-2020.tgz`` and ``mmomni reconfigure``

Future releases may include automation for snapshot management.

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
----------------------------------

What are the ``mmomni`` commands and what do they do?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``mmomni backup``: Takes a complete snapshot of your Mattermost server and places the backup file in a specified file location.
``mmomni restore``: Restores specified backup file to your Mattermost server.
``mmomni reconfigure``: Reruns the process that changes domain, SSL, or any Omnibus-specified restrictions such as the ability to upload plugins.
``mmomni status``: Shows current status of all Omnibus components.
``mmomni tail``: Runs a join tail of logs of all Omnibus components.

Can I install without a domain?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Although the recommended way to install and configure Omnibus is with SSL enabled, if you want to use or test without it, you can run: 
``sudo MMO_HTTPS=false apt install mattermost-omnibus``

What happened to ``config.json``?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Mattermost Omnibus does not use a file for managing server configuration settings. You can edit your config by running the following mmctl command: ``mmctl config edit``.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mattermost Omnibus does not use a file for managing server configuration settings. You can edit your config by running the following mmctl command after connecting mmctl to the instance: ``mmctl config edit``. If you are logged into the machine as the ``mattermost`` user, you can use ``mmctl --local config edit`` as well.
```

Installing Mattermost Omnibus
============================

Overview
---------

Mattermost Omnibus is a Debian package that packages the individual components of a Mattermost deployment into a single installation process. The package leverages the ``apt`` package manager to install and keep the components of the platform updated, using a custom CLI and ansible recipes to link those components together and configure them.

Mattermost Omnibus currently supports Ubuntu's ``bionic`` and ``focal`` distributions. Support for RedHat/CentOS distributions will be available in future versions.

Prerequisites
-------------

> - A clean Ubuntu server (18.04. Or 20.04)

Reviewer: nit: 

```suggestion
- A clean Ubuntu server (18.04 or 20.04)
```

- A domain name pointing to that server
- Root level access to the server

> Installing Mattermost Omnibus

Reviewer: We're using the same title twice, so maybe we could change this one

```suggestion
Configuring Mattermost Omnibus Repositories
```

------------------------------

The Omnibus repositories are configured using a cURL command:

``curl -o- deb.packages.mattermost.com/repo-setup.sh | sudo bash``

This command configures the repositories needed for a ``PostgreSQL`` database, an ``nginx`` web server to act as a proxy, and ``certbot`` to issue and renew the SSL certificate.

> In order to issue that certificate, the installer requests a domain name and an email address from us. These are used to generate the certificate and deliver any related communications respectively.

Reviewer: Maybe we should move this line right below the `apt install mattermost-omnibus`, as there two values are going to be requested right after running that command

Installing Mattermost Omnibus
------------------------------

If you're installing Omnibus, and have a domain and SSL use:

``sudo apt install mattermost-omnibus``.

After all the packages are installed, Omnibus runs the ansible scripts that configure all the platform components and starts the server. To access Mattermost, open a browser, navigate to your domain, and create the System Admin user to start using the platform.

Updating Mattermost Omnibus
-----------------------------

Mattermost Omnibus is integrated with the ``apt`` package manager. When a new Mattermost version is released, run:

``sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade``

This downloads the latest version of Mattermost and updates your Mattermost platform.

Configuring Mattermost Omnibus
----------------------------------------

.. note::

>   Plugin uploads and HTTPS are enabled by default. These settings are modified in the ``yaml`` file using `mmctl config edit <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/mmctl-cli-tool.html#mmctl-config-edit>`__.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  Plugin uploads, local mode and HTTPS are enabled by default. These settings are modified in the ``yaml`` file using `mmctl config edit <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/mmctl-cli-tool.html#mmctl-config-edit>`__.
```

>   Plugin uploads and HTTPS are enabled by default. These settings are modified in the ``yaml`` file using `mmctl config edit <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/mmctl-cli-tool.html#mmctl-config-edit>`__.

Reviewer: Adding another property configured by default and changing config method as the `yaml` file needs to be modified directly:

```suggestion
  Plugin uploads, local mode and HTTPS are enabled by default. These settings are modified in the ``yaml`` file as described below.
```

> With Mattermost Omnibus, the ``config.json`` file no longer exists as Omnibus has its own configuration file located in ``/etc/mattermost/mmomni.yml``. This file contains the data that Omnibus needs to configure the platform and connect all the services together. So you’ll need to use mmctl to make changes to your Mattermost server configuration using ``mmctl config edit``. If you wish to manage your server locally, you may want to enable local mode for mmctl.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
With Mattermost Omnibus, the ``config.json`` file no longer exists as `Omnibus stores the Mattermost configuration in the database <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/config-in-database.html>`__. The Omnibus platform itself requires of a configuration of its own, that is stored in ``/etc/mattermost/mmomni.yml``. This file contains the data that Omnibus needs to configure the platform and connect all the services together. So you’ll need to use mmctl to make changes to your Mattermost server configuration using ``mmctl --local config edit``.
```

Removed the last bit as local mode comes now enabled by default.

- ``fqdn``: The domain name for the Mattermost application. This is the value that is asked during the install process, and it’s used to populate the ``ServiceSettings.SiteURL`` Mattermost configuration property, as well as to retrieve and configure the SSL certificate for the server.
- ``email``: The email address used for certificate communications. This is the value that is asked during the install process, and it will not be used if HTTPS is disabled.
- ``https``: This indicates whether the platform should be configured to use HTTPS or HTTP with values ``true`` or ``false``. The recommended way to install Mattermost is to use HTTPS, but you can disable it if required.
- ``data_directory``: This is the directory where Mattermost stores its data.
- ``enable_plugin_uploads``: This setting can be ``true`` or ``false`` and is used to configure the ``PluginSettings.EnableUploads`` Mattermost configuration property.
- ``enable_local_mode``: This setting can be ``true`` or ``false`` and is used to configure the ``ServiceSettings.EnableLocalMode`` Mattermost configuration property.

> 

Reviewer: We should add a note at some point in this section saying something like:

```
After modifying the ``mmomni.yml`` configuration file, you need to run ``mmomni reconfigure`` for Omnibus to apply the changes and restart the Mattermost platform.
```

``sudo apt remove --purge mattermost mattermost-omnibus``

Backup and Restore using the Mattermost Omnibus CLI
--------------------------------------------------

Mattermost Omnibus includes a CLI tool: ``mmomni``, which is used to manage configuration.

Server and domain migration as well as backup and restore is now much easier - you can take snapshots of all content in your Mattermost server. This includes all content, users, plugins, configurations, and databases. You can restore on the same server or move to another server at any time.

Backup example:

``mmomni backup -o /tmp/Aug27-2020.tgz``

Restore example:

``mmomni restore /tmp/Aug27-2020.tgz`` and ``mmomni reconfigure``

Future releases may include automation for snapshot management.

Frequently Asked Questions (FAQs)
----------------------------------

What are the ``mmomni`` commands and what do they do?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

``mmomni backup``: Takes a complete snapshot of your Mattermost server and places the backup file in a specified file location.
``mmomni restore``: Restores specified backup file to your Mattermost server.

> ``mmomni reconfigure``: Reruns the process that changes domain, SSL, or any Omnibus-specified restrictions such as the ability to upload plugins.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
``mmomni reconfigure``: Reruns the process that changes domain, SSL, or any Omnibus-specified restrictions such as the ability to upload plugins. It applies as well any changes made to the ``mmomni.yml`` configuration file.
```

``mmomni status``: Shows current status of all Omnibus components.
``mmomni tail``: Runs a join tail of logs of all Omnibus components.

Can I install without a domain?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

Although the recommended way to install and configure Omnibus is with SSL enabled, if you want to use or test without it, you can run: 
``sudo MMO_HTTPS=false apt install mattermost-omnibus``.

What happened to ``config.json``?
^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^

> Mattermost Omnibus does not use a file for managing server configuration settings. You can edit your config by running the following mmctl command after connecting mmctl to the instance: ``mmctl config edit``. If you are logged into the machine as the ``mattermost`` user, you can use ``mmctl --local config edit`` as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Mattermost Omnibus `stores the configuration of the Mattermost server into the database <https://docs.mattermost.com/administration/config-in-database.html>`__. You can edit your config by running the following mmctl command after connecting mmctl to the instance: ``mmctl config edit``. If you are logged into the machine as the ``mattermost`` user, you can use ``mmctl --local config edit`` as well.
```

Installing Mattermost Omnibus
============================

Overview
---------

Mattermost Omnibus is a Debian package that packages the individual components of a Mattermost deployment into a single installation process. The package leverages the ``apt`` package manager to install and keep the components of the platform updated, using a custom CLI and ansible recipes to link those components together and configure them.

Mattermost Omnibus currently supports Ubuntu's ``bionic`` and ``focal`` distributions. Support for RedHat/CentOS distributions will be available in future versions.

Prerequisites
-------------

- A clean Ubuntu server (18.04 or 20.04)
- A domain name pointing to that server
- Root level access to the server

Configuring Mattermost Omnibus Repositories
-------------------------------------------

The Omnibus repositories are configured using a cURL command:

``curl -o- deb.packages.mattermost.com/repo-setup.sh | sudo bash``

> This command configures the repositories needed for a ``PostgreSQL`` database, an ``nginx`` web server to act as a proxy, and ``certbot`` to issue and renew the SSL certificate.

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
This command configures the repositories needed for a ``PostgreSQL`` database, an ``nginx`` web server to act as a proxy, and ``certbot`` to issue and renew the SSL certificate. Last thing, it configures the Mattermost Omnibus repository, and from that point on we're ready to run the install command.
```

Installing Mattermost Omnibus
------------------------------

If you're installing Omnibus, and have a domain and SSL use:

> ``sudo apt install mattermost-omnibus``.

Reviewer: nit:

```suggestion
``sudo apt install mattermost-omnibus``
```

In order to issue that certificate, the installer requests a domain name and an email address from us. These are used to generate the certificate and deliver any related communications respectively.

After all the packages are installed, Omnibus runs the ansible scripts that configure all the platform components and starts the server. To access Mattermost, open a browser, navigate to your domain, and create the System Admin user to start using the platform.

Updating Mattermost Omnibus
-----------------------------

Mattermost Omnibus is integrated with the ``apt`` package manager. When a new Mattermost version is released, run:

``sudo apt update && sudo apt upgrade``

This downloads the latest version of Mattermost and updates your Mattermost platform.

Configuring Mattermost Omnibus
----------------------------------------

.. note::

>   Plugin uploads, local mode and HTTPS are enabled by default. These settings are modified in the ``yaml`` file as described below.

Author: ```suggestion
  Plugin uploads, local mode, and HTTPS are enabled by default. These settings are modified in the ``yaml`` file as described below.
```

``mmomni backup``: Takes a complete snapshot of your Mattermost server and places the backup file in a specified file location.
``mmomni restore``: Restores specified backup file to your Mattermost server.

> ``mmomni reconfigure``: Reruns the process that changes domain, SSL, or any Omnibus-specified restrictions such as the ability to upload plugins. It also applies to any changes made to the ``mmomni.yml`` configuration file.

Reviewer: :facepalm: apologies, introduced a typo in my suggestion:

```suggestion
``mmomni reconfigure``: Reruns the process that changes domain, SSL, or any Omnibus-specified restrictions such as the ability to upload plugins. It also applies any changes made to the ``mmomni.yml`` configuration file.
```
